[release] Create 1.14 release-notes (#17182)
apache/flink: docs/content.zh/release-notes/flink-1.14.md

---
title: "Release Notes - Flink 1.14"
---
<!--
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
distributed with this work for additional information
regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
"License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

  http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
software distributed under the License is distributed on an
"AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations
under the License.
-->

# Release Notes - Flink 1.14

These release notes discuss important aspects, such as configuration, behavior, or dependencies,
that changed between Flink 1.13 and Flink 1.14. Please read these notes carefully if you are
planning to upgrade your Flink version to 1.14.

> ### DataStream API

Reviewer: I'd bring Table API first. We should go away from DataStream first, especially if not much has happened.

#### Expose a consistent GlobalDataExchangeMode

##### [FLINK-23402](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-23402)

The default DataStream API shuffle mode for batch executions has been changed to blocking exchanges
for all edges of the stream graph. A new option `execution.batch-shuffle-mode` allows to change it
to pipelined behavior if necessary.

#### Allow @TypeInfo annotation on POJO field declarations

##### [FLINK-12141](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-12141)

`@TypeInfo` annotations can now also be used on POJO fields which, for example, can help to define

> custom serializers for third-party classes that can otherwise not be annotated themselves.

Reviewer: Swap topics. Let's start with the simple one and then the more technical, advanced later.

`"Flink Batch Job"`. A custom name can be set with config option `pipeline.name`.

#### Propagate unique keys for fromChangelogStream

##### [FLINK-24033](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-24033)

Compared to 1.13.2, `StreamTableEnvironment.fromChangelogStream` might produce a different stream
because primary keys were not properly considered before.

#### Support new type inference for Table#flatMap

##### [FLINK-16769](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-16769)

`Table.flatMap()` supports the new type system now. Users are requested to upgrade their functions.

#### Add Scala implicit conversions for new API methods

##### [FLINK-22590](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-22590)

The Scala implicits that convert between DataStream API and Table API have been updated to the new
methods of FLIP-136.

The changes might require an update of pipelines that used `toTable` or implicit conversions from
`Table` to `DataStream[Row]`.

#### Remove YAML environment file support in SQL Client

##### [FLINK-22540](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-22540)

> The sql-client-defaults.yaml YAML file was deprecated in 1.13 release and now it is totally removed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The sql-client-defaults.yaml YAML file was deprecated in 1.13 release and now it is completely removed
```

##### [FLINK-22620](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-22620)

The OrcTableSource and related classes (including OrcInputFormat) have been removed. Use the
filesystem connector with an ORC format as a replacement. It is possible to read via Table & SQL API
and convert the Table to DataStream API if necessary. DataSet API is not supported anymore.

#### Drop usages of BatchTableEnvironment and old planner in Python

##### [FLINK-22619](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-22619)

The Python API does not offer a dedicated BatchTableEnvironment anymore. Instead, users can switch
to the unified TableEnvironment for both batch and stream processing. Only the Blink planner (the
only remaining planner in 1.14) is supported.

#### Migrate ModuleFactory to the new factory stack

##### [FLINK-23720](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-23720)

The `LOAD/UNLOAD MODULE` architecture for table modules has been updated to the new factory stack of
FLIP-95. Users of this feature should update their `ModuleFactory` implementations.

#### Migrate Table API to new KafkaSink

##### [FLINK-23639](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-23639)

> Table API/SQL write to Kafka with the new KafkaSink.

Author: @fapaul @AHeise May I ask you to help me with this one?

If I understand it correctly the state does not play any role here as it is for Table API? What are the user facing consequences? Has the properties changed? If not, do we even need to mention it?

> Table API/SQL write to Kafka with the new KafkaSink.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Table API/SQL write to Kafka with the new `KafkaSink`. When migrating from a query writing to Kafka in exactly-once mode from an earlier Flink version, make sure to terminate the old application with stop-with-savepoint to avoid lingering Kafka transactions. To run in exactly-once processing mode, the sink needs a user-configured and unique transaction prefix, such that transactions of different applications do not interfere with each other. 
```

> ### Connectors

Reviewer 2: Should we include `HybridSource` as new feature?

https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-22670
https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/connectors/datastream/hybridsource/

Author: To be honest, I am always torn when it comes to adding "just" new features here. After all we start the page with:

> These release notes discuss important aspects, such as configuration, behavior, or dependencies, that changed between 
Flink 1.x and Flink 1.y. Please read these notes carefully if you are planning to upgrade your Flink version to 1.y.

New features does not necessarily fall into that category. I understand though we have quite a few of such already in here. However, I think we should definitely list it here (which we actually do): https://github.com/apache/flink-web/pull/466

Reviewer 2: Makes sense, thanks!

#### Implement FLIP-179: Expose Standardized Operator Metrics

##### [FLINK-23652](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-23652)

Connectors using unified Source and Sink interface expose certain standardized metrics
automatically.

#### Port KafkaSink to FLIP-143

##### [FLINK-22902](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-22902)

> KafkaSink supersedes FlinkKafkaProducer and provides efficient exactly-once and at-least-once

Author: @fapaul @AHeise May I ask you to help me with this one?

> KafkaSink supersedes FlinkKafkaProducer and provides efficient exactly-once and at-least-once
> writing with the new unified sink interface supporting both batch and streaming mode of DataStream
> API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
KafkaSink supersedes FlinkKafkaProducer and provides efficient exactly-once and at-least-once writing with the new unified sink interface supporting both batch and streaming mode of DataStream API. To upgrade, please stop with savepoint. `KafkaSink` needs a user-configured and unique transaction prefix, such that transactions of different applications do not interfere with each other.
```

#### Deprecate FlinkKafkaConsumer

##### [FLINK-24055](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-24055)

> 
> FlinkKafkaConsumer has been deprecated in favor of KafkaSource, FlinkKafkaProducer has been
> deprecated in favor of KafkaSink.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

`FlinkKafkaConsumer` has been deprecated in favor of `KafkaSource`. To upgrade to the new version, please store the offsets in Kafka with `setCommitOffsetsOnCheckpoints` in the old `FlinkKafkaConsumer` and then stop with a savepoint. When resuming from the savepoint, please use `setStartingOffsets(OffsetsInitializer.committedOffsets())` in the new `KafkaSourceBuilder` to transfer the offsets to the new source. 

```

#### Pulsar Source

##### [FLINK-20731](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-20731)

Flink now directly provides a way to read data from Pulsar with DataStream API.

#### Add Support for Azure Data Lake Store Gen 2 in Flink File System

##### [FLINK-18562](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-18562)

Flink now supports reading from Azure Data Lake Store Gen 2 with the flink-azure-fs-hadoop
filesystem using the abfs(s) scheme.

#### InputStatus should not contain END_OF_RECOVERY

##### [FLINK-23474](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-23474)

`InputStatus.END_OF_RECOVERY` was removed. It was an internal flag that should never be returned from
SourceReaders. Returning that value in earlier versions might lead to misbehaviour.

#### Connector-base exposes dependency to flink-core.

##### [FLINK-22964](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-22964)

Connectors do not transitively hold a reference to `flink-core` anymore. That means that a fat jar
with a connector does not include `flink-core` with this fix.

> ### Runtime & Coordination

Reviewer 3: @dawidwys Sorry for the late updates. Would you like to include the release notes of FLINK-21924 into the "Runtime & Coordination" section?

Author: Isn't it just an ad for the feature? How does it match the purpose of the page?

> These release notes discuss important aspects, such as configuration, behavior, or dependencies, that changed between
Flink 1.x and Flink 1.y. Please read these notes carefully if you are planning to upgrade your Flink version to 1.y.

Doesn't it fit this page more? https://github.com/apache/flink-web/pull/466

Reviewer 3: I just see the Pulsar connector, which is also a new feature, was added. Sorry for the misunderstanding. If the release note just contains capability changes, FLINK-21924 should not be included here.

Author: I agree it's not consistent. I feel there is a misunderstanding/there is no common agreement on what to put in here. I tried removing just new features if I spotted them.

Author: btw, I sent a short note to the ML about it: https://lists.apache.org/thread.html/r675956b2d333a9b1c73e3c3b942dd25bcbb12903f00ccfdda9f3610b%40%3Cdev.flink.apache.org%3E

> 

Reviewer 4: @dawidwys would you include the release notes of FLINK-21110 into "Runtime & Coordination" section?
I have just updated it. Sorry for the late updates.

Reviewer 3: @dawidwys Sorry for the late updates. Would you like to include the release notes of FLINK-21924 into the "Runtime & Coordination" section?

#### Increase akka.ask.timeout for tests using the MiniCluster

##### [FLINK-23906](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-23906)

The default `akka.ask.timeout` used by the `MiniCluster` has been increased to 5 minutes. If you

> want to use a smaller value, then you have to set it explicitly in the passed configuration.

Reviewer 5: Should we add something like this?

*The change is due to the fact that messages cannot get lost in a single-process minicluster, so this timeout (which otherwise helps detecting message loss in distributed setups) has no benefit here.*

*The increased timeout reduces the number of false-positive timeouts, for example during heavy tests on loaded CI/CD workers or during debugging.*

#### The node IP obtained in NodePort mode is a VIP

##### [FLINK-23507](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-23507)

When using `kubernetes.rest-service.exposed.type=NodePort`, connection string for Rest gateway is
now correctly constructed in form of `<nodeIp>:<nodePort>` instead of
`<kubernetesApiServerUrl>:<nodePort>`. This may be a breaking change for some users.

This also introduces a new config option `kubernetes.rest-service.exposed.node-port-address-type` that
lets you select `<nodeIp>` from a desired range.

#### Timeout heartbeat if the heartbeat target is no longer reachable

##### [FLINK-23209](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-23209)

> Flink now supports to detect dead TaskManagers via the number of consecutive failed heartbeat RPCs.

Reviewer 5: I would rewrite this to the following:

Flink speeds up the detection of failed TaskManagers by recognizing unreachable network destinations, in addition to the existing mechanism of measuring heartbeat timeouts.

When the JobManager learns (via the OS network stack) that the TaskManager is unreachable on the network level, it immediately treats the Heartbeat RPC as failed. After *N* failed RPCs (configurable via `heartbeat.rpc-failure-threshold` default of 2), the TaskManager is marked as dead.

Together with the faster heartbeat interval, this reduces the time to detect a failed TaskManager by default from 50-60 seconds to 5-10 seconds.

Author: @tillrohrmann Could you double-check the proposal from Stephan? I can apply the change later.

Reviewer 6: cc @zentol

The threshold until a TaskManager is marked as unreachable can be configured
via `heartbeat.rpc-failure-threshold`. This can speed up the detection of dead TaskManagers
significantly.

> #### RpcService should fail result futures if messages could not be sent

Reviewer 5: Change this to **RPCs fail faster when target is unreachable**

##### [FLINK-23202](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-23202)

> Flink now fails rpc requests that cannot be delivered immediately instead of waiting for

Reviewer 5: Similarly as above, I would slightly adjust this to:

The same way Flink detects unreachable heartbeat targets faster, Flink now also immediately fails RPCs where the target is known by the OS to be unreachable on a network level, instead of waiting for a timeout (`akka.ask.timeout`).

One effect this are faster task failovers, because cancelling tasks on a dead `TaskExecutor` no longer gets delayed by the RPC timeout.

If this faster failover is a problem in certain setups (which might rely on the fast that external systems hit timeouts), we recommend to configure the application's restart strategy with a restart delay.

Author: @tillrohrmann Could you double-check the proposal from Stephan? I can apply the change later.

Reviewer 7: Sounds good 👍

the `akka.ask.timeout`. This has the effect that certain operations, such as cancelling tasks on a
dead `TaskExecutor`, will no longer delay the restart of jobs by `akka.ask.timeout`. This might
increase the number of restart attempts Flink will do in a given time interval. Hence, we recommend
to adjust the restart delay to compensate for the faster completion of rpcs if this behaviour should
become a problem.

> #### Count and fail the task when the disk is error on JobManager

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
#### Changes in accounting of IOExceptions when triggering checkpoints on JobManager
```

##### [FLINK-23189](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-23189)

IOExceptions thrown during triggering checkpoints on the Job Manager (like for example errors while

> creating directories) will be since now accounted against maximum number of tolerable checkpoint

Reviewer 5: Language

##### [FLINK-22002](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-22002)

The config option `taskmanager.slot.timeout` falls now back to `akka.ask.timeout` if no value has
been configured.

#### DuplicateJobSubmissionException after JobManager failover

##### [FLINK-21928](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-21928)

The fix for this problem only works if the ApplicationMode is used with a single job submission and
if the user code does not access the `JobExecutionResult`. If any of these conditions is violated,
then Flink cannot guarantee that the whole Flink application is executed.

Additionally, it is still required that the user cleans up the corresponding HA entries for the
running jobs registry because these entries won't be reliably cleaned up when encountering the
situation described by FLINK-21928.

#### Zookeeper node under leader and leaderlatch is not deleted after job finished

##### [FLINK-20695](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-20695)

The `HighAvailabilityServices` have received a new method `cleanupJobData` which can be implemented
in order to clean up job related HA data after a given job has terminated.

### Checkpoints

> #### Change local alignment timeout back to the global time out
> 
> ##### [FLINK-23041](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-23041)
> 
> The semantic of alignmentTimeout configuration has changed to such meaning:
> 
> The time between the start of a checkpoint(on the checkpoint coordinator) and the time when the
> checkpoint barrier is received by a task.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
#### The semantic of alignmentTimeout configuration has changed the meaning

##### [FLINK-23041](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-23041)

Now it's measured as the time between the start of a checkpoint(on the checkpoint coordinator) and the
time when the checkpoint barrier is received by a task.
```

> #### Disable unaligned checkpoints for broadcast partitioning
> 
> ##### [FLINK-22815](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-22815)
> 
> Unaligned checkpoints were disabled for BROADCAST exchanges.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
#### Unaligned checkpoints were disabled for BROADCAST exchanges.

##### [FLINK-22815](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-22815)
```

Broadcast partitioning can not work with unaligned checkpointing. There are no guarantees that
records are consumed at the same rate in all channels. This can result in some tasks applying state
changes corresponding to a certain broadcasted event while others don't. In turn upon restore, it
may lead to an inconsistent state.

#### DefaultCompletedCheckpointStore drops unrecoverable checkpoints silently

##### [FLINK-22502](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-22502)

On recovery, if a failure occurs during retrieval of a checkpoint, the job is restarted (instead of
skipping the checkpoint in some circumstances). This prevents potential consistency violations.

#### Recover checkpoints when JobMaster gains leadership

> ##### [FLINK-22483](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-22483)

Reviewer 5: I think we need to rewrite this. No user cares about some internal factory interface.

What they care about is that Flink doesn't go to the external checkpoint storage any more to load checkpoint metadata (except when the JobManager fails over or changes leader), with the effect that the JobManager is much less loaded on failover: Shorter stalls, less external I/O.

Please write this more for the average user, not describing implementation details.

Author: @dmvk May I ask you to help me with this?

Reviewer 6: 👍

I think we should leave a small note, that this changes the interface as it's public facing (even though 99.99% user won't touch it, we still allow them to override it).

How about:

```
Flink no longer re-loads checkpoint metadata from the external storage before restoring the task state after the failover (except when the JobManager fails over / changes leadership). This results in less external I/O and faster failover.

Please note that this changes a public interfaces around `CompletedCheckpointStore`, that we allow overriding by providing custom implementation of HA Services.

```

> #### Recover checkpoints when JobMaster gains leadership
> 
> ##### [FLINK-22483](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-22483)
> 
> This changes a semi-public interface around CompletedCheckpointStore.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
#### Removal of `CompletedCheckpointRecover#recover()` method.

##### [FLINK-22483](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-22483)
```

`CompletedCheckpointRecover#recover()` method has been removed as we only need to "recover" once,
after JobManagerRunner gains leadership. We are now expecting CheckpointRecoveryFactory to always
return an already recovered CompletedCheckpointStore. To make this new behavior more explicit,
we've renamed `CheckpointRecoveryFactory#createCompletedCheckpointStore` factory method to
`CheckpointRecoveryFactory#createRecoveredCompletedCheckpointStore`.

> #### Remove CheckpointConfig.setPreferCheckpointForRecovery because it can lead to data loss
> 
> ##### [FLINK-20427](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-20427)
> 
> Remove deprecated CheckpointConfig#setPreferCheckpointForRecovery

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
#### 
Removal of the deprecated CheckpointConfig#setPreferCheckpointForRecovery method.

##### [FLINK-20427](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-20427)
```

Deprecated method CheckpointConfig#setPreferCheckpointForRecovery was removed, because preferring
older checkpoints over newer savepoints for recovery can lead to data loss.

> ### Dependency upgrades

Reviewer: Do we also list such things https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-19929 ? I wouldn't want to have it here but I'd like to clarify that.

Reviewer 7: I think we usually only list change where we expect issues for users. A dependency bump usually doesn't fulfill that condition.

Author: +1

> #### Bump up rocksdb version

Reviewer 5: Would list the target version here

##### [FLINK-14482](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-14482)

> FRocksDB has been upgraded to 6.20.3-ververica-1.0. Compared to the previous version, the new

Reviewer 5: Most users don't know about FRocksDB, that is like an implementation detail. I would talk about this as RocksDB here.

I would also add a slight summary of the performance situation here, the executive summary that all users will be interested in.

Author: @Myasuka May I ask you to help me with the summary of the performance implications?

Reviewer 9: How about this:

`
Compared to the previous version, the new version contains lots of bug fix, ARM platform supported, musl library supported, and more attractive features. 
However, the new versin can entail at most 8% performance regression according to our tests (more details can be found in https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/FLINK-14482).
`
